---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Software and Building Architecture Compared"
date: 2012-04-14 14:05
comments: true
categories:
  - Software
tags: 
  - Software
---

People tend to only understand what they can see. For most people it is
difficult to grasp more abstract matters without somehow visualizing them.
Software is an example of such an abstract matter. Let us visit the process of
developing software through a comparison with developing a building.

<!-- more -->

Everyone knows that in order to build something you will have to think about it
first. Just putting some sticks together as you did when you were playing
outside does not work very well for a skyscraper. For any construction you will
need an architecture to design it first. After your architect has designed the
project is has to go through some checks as to whether you will have enough
sunlight in the house, enough ventilation and perhaps most importantly that the
structure will not come down on itself! Ideally you only start building when
both the architect, the contractor and yourself are satisfied that the building
meets all requirements. Our knowledge on the construction of buildings has been
growing since we first exited our caves and thus we generally can found our
decisions during each step of the process on this knowledge.

Most people have not had the experience of just building some software that
eventually crashes because they did not think it through, it is not something
you do as a kid when playing outside. This makes things a bit more complicated
to imagine, but the development of software is quite analogous to the
development of some construction.

Coming up with a program is even more complicated than building a construction.
It comes with all the issues mentioned above when creating a building. It first
has to be designed, then it has to be passed along to someone leading the
developers to check for practicality and ideally usability. After that it can be
passed to the developers for the writing proper. The issue at hand being,
however, is that in the world of software wishes from the client and the
environment change continuously during the project. This causes an oscillation
between the stages mentioned above creating long delays before the final product
is finished. To make matters worse, the final product will not be the perfect
fit to the requirements due to the delays.

Why does this happen, you wonder? There are several reasons. For starters the
art of programming is still very young, learning from our mistakes. Even the
Romans had some mishaps when building their famous aqueducts. This entails that
we still lack the experience to found our design decisions on. Another reason is
that demands and wishes change rapidly in our new hyper-dynamic society. When
you set off on constructing a building you have a very good idea of why you want
to do that, what it will take and what your usage of the building will be.
Software projects are generally given less consideration.

A very contributing factor to the complexity of creating a software product is
the fact that most cases the software has to integrate 'perfectly' in the
physical process of the client, where most do not fully grasp their own process,
and that it has to communicate with other software products. These other
products might not be designed with the new scenario in mind and thus either
need adjustment or another way around it has to be found.

So, this is why coming up with a software product is just as difficult as
constructing a building, and is in most cases even harder. The next time someone
asks why it takes so long to write (good) software you just ask how long it took
to design his custom made house. :)


<!-- Writing a program is quite complicated. It consists of many steps, most of which
are not even of a technical nature. It requires human interaction, figuring out
requirements and prioritizing them, scheduling of your resources (your
programmers), and continuous feedback to the client. Often you will have to deal
with changing requirements, either because the client decides he wants something
else, or because you discover edge cases when looking more closely at your
original requirements. Only after you have 

 

When people ask me what I do I answer them that I build software. These same
people often cannot grasp why building software is so difficult. I would like to
compare the development of a software product with the development of a
building.

Everyone knows that in order to build a house you first need to get the proper
permissions. After you have received the permission you can start designing your
house. In order to design you will need to know what kind of family will live in
the building, will they have kids, or is it a house for elderly people? What is
the environment the building will be build? Is it dry with soft ground or will
it be in a wet climate on hard rocks?

No grasp on the physical sense of software. Difficult to imagine/abstract. -->